README.md, before:

Tools for the processing of LOTOS-EUROS outputs
================

## Introduction

lotoseurosR is a collection of functions to aid the processing of inputs
and outputs for the LOTOS-EUROS (LE) chemistry transport model
https://lotos-euros.tno.nl/open-source-version/

Downloading the model and running with default settings will generate
the output in the mod_files/output folder. The examples given in this
document are based on these files but should also work with any surface
LE model output files.

The input_surf_concs and input_surf_meteo will import the concentration
or meteo outputs and output as a raster brick that can be plotted or
used with openair, worldmet and saqgetr to visualise the data and assist
with validation.

By converting to georeferenced raster layers and raster bricks, the
process of extracting time-series, regridding (e.g. to combine with data
on different grid systems/resolutions) and plotting is simplified and
sped up. Layered image files can also be an efficient file format in
terms of read/write speed and disk size, especially compared with
dataframes (e.g. csv). It should be noted that saving raster files as
other formats (e.g. native .RDS files) might appear to work, but they
are linked to the memory. On restarting R they appear to be loaded, but
when the RAM is cleared on restart they will be empty).

| le_specs | omrekenfactor | tmap_nam                           | dg_nam                              |
|:---------|--------------:|:-----------------------------------|:------------------------------------|
| o3       |    1967213115 | ‘O’\[3\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’    | O<sub>3</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)    |
| no2      |    1885450820 | ‘NO’\[2\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’   | NO<sub>2</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)   |
| no       |    1229918033 | ‘NO (’\* mu*‘g/m’^3*’)’            | NO (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)               |
| nh3      |     697991803 | ‘NH’\[3\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’   | NH<sub>3</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)   |
| so2      |    2625524590 | ‘SO’\[2\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’   | SO<sub>2</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)   |
| hno3     |    2582377049 | ‘HNO’\[3\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’  | HNO<sub>3</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)  |
| co       |    1147950820 | ‘CO’\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’        | CO (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)               |
| tpm25    |    1000000000 | ‘PM’\[2.5\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’ | PM<sub>10</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)  |
| tpm10    |    1000000000 | ‘PM’\[10\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’  | PM<sub>2.5</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>) |

table of varient names

``` r
mod_rast <- import_surf_concs(species = c('o3','no2'), path = 'files/output', output_units = 'volume')
```

    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120701.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120701.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120702.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120702.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120703.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120703.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120704.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120704.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120705.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120705.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120706.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120706.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120707.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120707.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120708.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120708.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120709.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120709.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120710.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120710.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120711.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120711.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120712.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120712.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120713.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120713.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120714.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120714.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120715.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120715.nc no2"

The plotting function will plot a summary of the period in the raster
file or the first 64 layers animated. The statistic option allows for
any statistical function to be applied. The base functions are ‘mean’,
‘sum’, ‘sd’.

![](plots/rmd/o3_2012-07-01_00_2012-07-15_23.gif)

``` r
sub_domain <- get_country_domain(countries = c('Greece'))
```

![](plots/rmd/tm1.png)

    FALSE [1] "all o3 sites imported between 2012-07-01 & 2012-07-15 23:00:00"

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)

    FALSE [1] "o3"

|       | date                | site    |       mod |      obs | species |
|:------|:--------------------|:--------|----------:|---------:|:--------|
| o3.1  | 2012-07-01 00:00:00 | gr0027a |  91.09168 | 102.7708 | o3      |
| o3.2  | 2012-07-01 01:00:00 | gr0027a |  82.12260 |  98.6875 | o3      |
| o3.3  | 2012-07-01 02:00:00 | gr0027a |  78.37096 |  99.4375 | o3      |
| o3.4  | 2012-07-01 03:00:00 | gr0027a |  75.67710 |  99.0000 | o3      |
| o3.5  | 2012-07-01 04:00:00 | gr0027a |  68.84624 |  98.3125 | o3      |
| o3.6  | 2012-07-01 05:00:00 | gr0027a |  53.92454 |  98.0000 | o3      |
| o3.7  | 2012-07-01 06:00:00 | gr0027a |  93.52081 |  98.1875 | o3      |
| o3.8  | 2012-07-01 07:00:00 | gr0027a |  92.28627 |  99.0625 | o3      |
| o3.9  | 2012-07-01 08:00:00 | gr0027a |  98.43075 |  99.7500 | o3      |
| o3.10 | 2012-07-01 09:00:00 | gr0027a | 102.63137 | 101.0625 | o3      |
| o3.11 | 2012-07-01 10:00:00 | gr0027a | 108.58906 | 103.0000 | o3      |
| o3.12 | 2012-07-01 11:00:00 | gr0027a | 112.08488 | 104.6250 | o3      |
| o3.13 | 2012-07-01 12:00:00 | gr0027a | 115.43834 | 106.4375 | o3      |
| o3.14 | 2012-07-01 13:00:00 | gr0027a | 115.98372 | 107.2500 | o3      |
| o3.15 | 2012-07-01 14:00:00 | gr0027a | 114.27141 | 108.5625 | o3      |

snapshot of modelled and observed concentrations

![](plots/rmd/sp1.png)

![](plots/rmd/sp2.png) ![](plots/rmd/tv.png)

Model statistics for all observation locations

``` r
kable(ms_all, caption = "model statistics for all ")
```

| default  |    n |      FAC2 |       MB |      MGE |      NMB |      NMGE |     RMSE |        r |        COE |       IOA |
|:---------|-----:|----------:|---------:|---------:|---------:|----------:|---------:|---------:|-----------:|----------:|
| all data | 2841 | 0.9296023 | 12.01345 | 28.48139 | 0.113871 | 0.2699644 | 35.90961 | 0.471697 | -0.1976541 | 0.4011729 |

model statistics for all

``` r
#time_dygraph(concs_dat, variable = c(all_labs[c(3,7,8,9,10)], 'Total'), ylab = spec_df$dg_nam[1])

#p1 <- plot_obs(data_brick = )
```

Model statistics split by site

``` r
kable(ms_sites, caption = "model statistics split by site")
```

| site    |   n |      FAC2 |         MB |      MGE |        NMB |       NMGE |     RMSE |         r |        COE |        IOA |
|:--------|----:|----------:|-----------:|---------:|-----------:|-----------:|---------:|----------:|-----------:|-----------:|
| gr0027a | 360 | 0.9555556 |  22.122604 | 27.87151 |  0.2294669 |  0.2890975 | 34.80123 | 0.6163953 | -0.6000175 |  0.1999912 |
| gr0028a | 360 | 0.9472222 |  18.380993 | 25.48185 |  0.1835341 |  0.2544361 | 33.17873 | 0.6085717 | -0.2560395 |  0.3719803 |
| gr0031a | 360 | 0.8500000 |  28.574978 | 32.43452 |  0.3096757 |  0.3515027 | 42.72669 | 0.6389239 | -0.1575482 |  0.4212259 |
| gr0035a | 270 | 0.9444444 |   8.486839 | 23.46411 |  0.0829304 |  0.2292831 | 28.73631 | 0.4935744 | -0.1619250 |  0.4190375 |
| gr0037a | 360 | 0.9722222 | -15.755505 | 26.25128 | -0.1173273 |  0.1954867 | 32.59708 | 0.5836262 | -2.1032714 | -0.3555188 |
| gr0039a |  66 | 1.0000000 |  17.164619 | 30.13688 |  0.1446930 |  0.2540455 | 35.68663 | 0.6676085 | -1.1818504 | -0.0833469 |
| gr0045a |   5 | 0.0000000 |  42.336650 | 42.33665 | 42.3366501 | 42.3366501 | 42.36869 |        NA |       -Inf | -1.0000000 |
| gr0047a | 340 | 0.9529412 | -22.541123 | 27.16373 | -0.1623329 |  0.1956231 | 34.75429 | 0.5948331 | -1.0685417 | -0.0331353 |
| gr0110r | 360 | 0.8222222 |  34.899002 | 36.25033 |  0.4548795 |  0.4724930 | 41.90507 | 0.6236108 | -0.7074619 |  0.1462691 |
| gr0120a | 360 | 0.9972222 |  17.772900 | 27.11035 |  0.1724253 |  0.2630134 | 34.66519 | 0.7524655 | -1.3114925 | -0.1347582 |

model statistics split by site

Commit message:

ws and wd plot added

README.md, after:

Tools for the processing of LOTOS-EUROS outputs
================

## Introduction

lotoseurosR is a collection of functions to aid the processing of inputs
and outputs for the LOTOS-EUROS (LE) chemistry transport model
https://lotos-euros.tno.nl/open-source-version/

Downloading the model and running with default settings will generate
the output in the mod_files/output folder. The examples given in this
document are based on these files but should also work with any surface
LE model output files.

The input_surf_concs and input_surf_meteo will import the concentration
or meteo outputs and output as a raster brick that can be plotted or
used with openair, worldmet and saqgetr to visualise the data and assist
with validation.

By converting to georeferenced raster layers and raster bricks, the
process of extracting time-series, regridding (e.g. to combine with data
on different grid systems/resolutions) and plotting is simplified and
sped up. Layered image files can also be an efficient file format in
terms of read/write speed and disk size, especially compared with
dataframes (e.g. csv). It should be noted that saving raster files as
other formats (e.g. native .RDS files) might appear to work, but they
are linked to the memory. On restarting R they appear to be loaded, but
when the RAM is cleared on restart they will be empty).

| le_specs | omrekenfactor | tmap_nam                           | dg_nam                              |
|:---------|--------------:|:-----------------------------------|:------------------------------------|
| o3       |    1967213115 | ‘O’\[3\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’    | O<sub>3</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)    |
| no2      |    1885450820 | ‘NO’\[2\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’   | NO<sub>2</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)   |
| no       |    1229918033 | ‘NO (’\* mu*‘g/m’^3*’)’            | NO (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)               |
| nh3      |     697991803 | ‘NH’\[3\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’   | NH<sub>3</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)   |
| so2      |    2625524590 | ‘SO’\[2\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’   | SO<sub>2</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)   |
| hno3     |    2582377049 | ‘HNO’\[3\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’  | HNO<sub>3</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)  |
| co       |    1147950820 | ‘CO’\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’        | CO (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)               |
| tpm25    |    1000000000 | ‘PM’\[2.5\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’ | PM<sub>10</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>)  |
| tpm10    |    1000000000 | ‘PM’\[10\]\*’ (‘\* mu*’g/m’^3*’)’  | PM<sub>2.5</sub> (μg/m<sup>3</sup>) |

table of varient names

``` r
mod_rast <- import_surf_concs(species = c('o3','no2'), path = 'files/output', output_units = 'volume')
```

    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120701.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120701.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120702.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120702.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120703.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120703.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120704.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120704.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120705.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120705.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120706.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120706.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120707.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120707.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120708.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120708.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120709.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120709.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120710.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120710.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120711.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120711.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120712.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120712.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120713.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120713.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120714.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120714.nc no2"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120715.nc o3"
    [1] "importing  files/output/LE_v2.2.001_conc-sfc_20120715.nc no2"

The plotting function will plot a summary of the period in the raster
file or the first 64 layers animated. The statistic option allows for
any statistical function to be applied. The base functions are ‘mean’,
‘sum’, ‘sd’.

![](plots/rmd/o3_2012-07-01_00_2012-07-15_23.gif)

``` r
sub_domain <- get_country_domain(countries = c('Greece'))
```

![](plots/rmd/tm1.png)

    FALSE [1] "all o3 sites imported between 2012-07-01 & 2012-07-15 23:00:00"

![](README_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)

    FALSE [1] "o3"

|       | date                | site    |       mod |      obs | species |
|:------|:--------------------|:--------|----------:|---------:|:--------|
| o3.1  | 2012-07-01 00:00:00 | gr0027a |  91.09168 | 102.7708 | o3      |
| o3.2  | 2012-07-01 01:00:00 | gr0027a |  82.12260 |  98.6875 | o3      |
| o3.3  | 2012-07-01 02:00:00 | gr0027a |  78.37096 |  99.4375 | o3      |
| o3.4  | 2012-07-01 03:00:00 | gr0027a |  75.67710 |  99.0000 | o3      |
| o3.5  | 2012-07-01 04:00:00 | gr0027a |  68.84624 |  98.3125 | o3      |
| o3.6  | 2012-07-01 05:00:00 | gr0027a |  53.92454 |  98.0000 | o3      |
| o3.7  | 2012-07-01 06:00:00 | gr0027a |  93.52081 |  98.1875 | o3      |
| o3.8  | 2012-07-01 07:00:00 | gr0027a |  92.28627 |  99.0625 | o3      |
| o3.9  | 2012-07-01 08:00:00 | gr0027a |  98.43075 |  99.7500 | o3      |
| o3.10 | 2012-07-01 09:00:00 | gr0027a | 102.63137 | 101.0625 | o3      |
| o3.11 | 2012-07-01 10:00:00 | gr0027a | 108.58906 | 103.0000 | o3      |
| o3.12 | 2012-07-01 11:00:00 | gr0027a | 112.08488 | 104.6250 | o3      |
| o3.13 | 2012-07-01 12:00:00 | gr0027a | 115.43834 | 106.4375 | o3      |
| o3.14 | 2012-07-01 13:00:00 | gr0027a | 115.98372 | 107.2500 | o3      |
| o3.15 | 2012-07-01 14:00:00 | gr0027a | 114.27141 | 108.5625 | o3      |

snapshot of modelled and observed concentrations

Now that the modelled and observed values have been joined together in a
data frame it is easy to use some Openair functions to plot the data.
Below are some examples.

![scatterplot showing modelled and observed
concentrations](plots/rmd/sp1.png)

![density scatterplot](plots/rmd/sp2.png) ![time variation
plot](plots/rmd/tv.png)

Model statistics for all observation locations

``` r
kable(ms_all, caption = "model statistics for all ")
```

| default  |    n |      FAC2 |       MB |      MGE |      NMB |      NMGE |     RMSE |        r |        COE |       IOA |
|:---------|-----:|----------:|---------:|---------:|---------:|----------:|---------:|---------:|-----------:|----------:|
| all data | 2841 | 0.9296023 | 12.01345 | 28.48139 | 0.113871 | 0.2699644 | 35.90961 | 0.471697 | -0.1976541 | 0.4011729 |

model statistics for all

``` r
#time_dygraph(concs_dat, variable = c(all_labs[c(3,7,8,9,10)], 'Total'), ylab = spec_df$dg_nam[1])

#p1 <- plot_obs(data_brick = )
```

Model statistics split by site

``` r
kable(ms_sites, caption = "model statistics split by site")
```

| site    |   n |      FAC2 |         MB |      MGE |        NMB |       NMGE |     RMSE |         r |        COE |        IOA |
|:--------|----:|----------:|-----------:|---------:|-----------:|-----------:|---------:|----------:|-----------:|-----------:|
| gr0027a | 360 | 0.9555556 |  22.122604 | 27.87151 |  0.2294669 |  0.2890975 | 34.80123 | 0.6163953 | -0.6000175 |  0.1999912 |
| gr0028a | 360 | 0.9472222 |  18.380993 | 25.48185 |  0.1835341 |  0.2544361 | 33.17873 | 0.6085717 | -0.2560395 |  0.3719803 |
| gr0031a | 360 | 0.8500000 |  28.574978 | 32.43452 |  0.3096757 |  0.3515027 | 42.72669 | 0.6389239 | -0.1575482 |  0.4212259 |
| gr0035a | 270 | 0.9444444 |   8.486839 | 23.46411 |  0.0829304 |  0.2292831 | 28.73631 | 0.4935744 | -0.1619250 |  0.4190375 |
| gr0037a | 360 | 0.9722222 | -15.755505 | 26.25128 | -0.1173273 |  0.1954867 | 32.59708 | 0.5836262 | -2.1032714 | -0.3555188 |
| gr0039a |  66 | 1.0000000 |  17.164619 | 30.13688 |  0.1446930 |  0.2540455 | 35.68663 | 0.6676085 | -1.1818504 | -0.0833469 |
| gr0045a |   5 | 0.0000000 |  42.336650 | 42.33665 | 42.3366501 | 42.3366501 | 42.36869 |        NA |       -Inf | -1.0000000 |
| gr0047a | 340 | 0.9529412 | -22.541123 | 27.16373 | -0.1623329 |  0.1956231 | 34.75429 | 0.5948331 | -1.0685417 | -0.0331353 |
| gr0110r | 360 | 0.8222222 |  34.899002 | 36.25033 |  0.4548795 |  0.4724930 | 41.90507 | 0.6236108 | -0.7074619 |  0.1462691 |
| gr0120a | 360 | 0.9972222 |  17.772900 | 27.11035 |  0.1724253 |  0.2630134 | 34.66519 | 0.7524655 | -1.3114925 | -0.1347582 |

model statistics split by site

If desired all species can be output from the model and plot using the
CorPlot. Also for the same location.

Meteo data can be imported in the same way and also plot as a sequental
hourly plot. Below is a plot of temperature for the full domain.

In the example files wind speed and direction are also output.

![time variation plot](plots/rmd/ws_wd_plot.gif)

Wind speed and direction code adapted from this post
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/47880918/how-to-plot-wind-direction-with-lat-lon-and-arrow-in-ggplot2
